Data and code to assess impact of fertilizer type on nitrogen losses to air and water.
Supporting the paper "Optimizing fertilizer selection using site dependent emission factors for ammonia, nitrous oxide, nitrogen oxides and nitrate".

Mitigating nitrogen losses to air and water in response to nitrogen fertilization from intensively managed croplands is a great challenge because of the policy ambitions to strongly reduce the impact of non-point-source nitrogen pollution in those regions. In this study we quantified emission factors (EFs) for nitrogen fertilizers for gaseous emissions, and leaching loss fractions for nitrate using 6109 observations. We also unraveled the impact of management, climate and soil properties on these EFs, and predicted for Europe how much fertilizer emissions can be reduced by optimizing fertilizer selection in combination with timing and application method and depending on site conditions.

Adjusting the fertilizer strategy by applying fertilizers at the right dose, the right time and the right place with the right fertilizer type (also known as the 4R nutrient stewardship) can increase the nitrogen use efficiency and reduce N losses to the environment, in particular for the type of fertilizer being used. However, its impact varies across regions due to the variation in site factors, such as weather and soil properties. Numerous meta-analyses have thus been done to unravel the driving factors controlling emissions of ammonia and nitrous oxide. However, an integrated assessment of the impact of fertilizer type and management (dose, time and application mode) on all nitrogen emissions to air and water,  while accounting for site factors, is missing. Furthermore, fertilizers like ammonium sulphate have been overlooked. In this study we used meta-regression models to evaluate the impacts of fertilizer strategy (with a focus on fertilizer type) on the emissions to air and water, as a function of site factors. We then predict the spatial variation of the potential impacts of fertilizer strategy on the emissions of ammonia, nitrogen oxide and nitrous oxide to air, and leaching of nitrate to water for Europe, making use of climatic and soil databases with information on those site factors, being a unique aspect of this study.
